History in the Us- Francisco Prado
	When someone speaks about martial arts what is the first thing that comes to mind. For some the first thing that comes to mind might be Karate, but there is more to martial art than just that. Recently Capoeira has exploded in popularity trough out the United States. Before it became popular Capoeira was not well known in the United States but that change when Jelon introduced the art in New York. 
	According to Mathis the “beginning of Capoeira in the United States is said to be brought by Jelon Vieira and Loremil Machado”. Although they are attributed to the introduction of Capoeira Artur Emidoio was amongst the first to perform abroad. One of the stops included the United States. In the United States he performed for Eisenhower and Kennedy. (Mathis 187) In the book by Gerard Taylor, Taylor claims that the art form was appealing to many martial artist and dancers. Also, the history of Capoeira’s beginnings was equally interesting as the art form itself. 
	In the United States Jelon was in a Broadway play named The Leaf People. The play was about Brazilian Natives. Jelon Vieira was born in Bahia, Brazil in 1953. He studied Capoeira with Mestres Bimba, Eziquiel, and Bobo. His firs encounter with Capoeira was at age 9. Not only did he study Capoeira  he also studied Afro-Brazillian dance. In 1975 Jelon moved to New York city, and in two years Jelon founded DanceBrazil. DanceBrazil is a prfessional dance an music company. Jelon did not stop there. In the 1980s he founded the Capoeira Foundation to promote Afro-Brazilian cultural forms.( Mathis 187) Acording to Matthias in The History of Afro-Brazilian Martial Art not only did he creat the two company people “believe his performances inspired the break dance craze of the 1980s”.  The website arts.gov says that in 2000 The Brazillian Cultural Center recognized him for being the “Pioneer of Capoeira in the Unite States.”
	Loremil, who acording to the New Your Times passed away in 1994, was also part of the Broadway show that Jelon was in. He also started a Capoeira school in New York. Acording to Matthias there were only four Capoeira schools in the United States. Loremil and Jelon where in New York. Then there is Eusebio da Silva Lobo who was in East St Louis and M. Acordeon was in San Francisco. Jump to present times and you can find Capoeira being taught troughout the United States. All these schools are here thanks to senior Brazilian teachers. These teachers have made their way to the United States to escape the harsh conditions in Brazil.
	Amoung these new teachers Joao Grande was one of the most respected. In 1992 Grande settled in New York where he opened his own acadamy. (Mathis 187) Grande inspired M. Cobra Mansa and Jurandir who established themselves in Washington and Seatle. The two mestres created the International Capoeira Angola Foundation (FICA).
	Acording tho FICA’s web site the Internatioanl Capoeira Angola Foundation is a “non-profit international organization dedicated to the practice, preservation and growth of Capoeira Angola”. The Mestre incharge of the Oakland group is Mestre Jurandir. The Oakland FICA group offers classes for all ages. They hold classes in their studeio that is located in West Oakland. They host the Roda every Friday at 6:30. Not only dose FICA have a studio in Oakland. They have studios trougought America. They have studios in Portland, Austin, and Baltimore to name a few. Their Headquarters is located in Washington D.C.
	Capoeira in the United States dose have its problems. Acording to Mathis, in the United Sates there is cotraversy about some studios “promoting roda for blacks only”. Not only are there studios that hold Roda for “black only”, there are also African-American teachers who have strickly decided to only teach African-American students. This is because the teachers belive that the “comon heritage of slaver constitutes the core reason why the art is atractive to the students”. (Mathis 190) The debate over wether to let non African-American students participate in the art has acording to Mathis “impacted the way Capoeira is practised in the United States. Apart from the few who hold thos view, Capoeira tends to be “all-inclusive. Maybe even more tan in Brazil”.( Mathis 191) 
	Today not only are the mestres of Caopeira Brazilian but there are also a number of American students who have reached the level of mestre. The first group of students who graduated in the unted states was the group from 1984 and since then the number of advanced students has continued to grow.( Mathis 187) The spreed of Capoeira in the United States has inpired many. Even though Capoeria was brought to Eourop before the United States the grouth of populatrity was not as great as in the United States, but just because it had a slow start dose no mean it was not popualr. It took longer to establish isthelf in Eoruop but it is growing in popularity. 







Annotated Bibliography - Francisco
Assunc¸a~o, Matthias Ro¨hrig. Capoeira: the history of an Afro-Brazilian martial art. Routledge, 	2005.
	This book that was written by Matthias Rohrig Assuncao. This book goes over many aspects of Capoeira but the reason I chose this as a source was for the section on the spread of Capoeira. In that section Matthias goes over how Capoeira spread throughout the United States and Europe. It also goes on to talk about the globalization of Capoeira. Over all this book has useful information.
Taylor, Gerard.  Capoeira: the Jogo de Angola from Luanda to cyberspace. Blue Snake Books,
	2007.	
	This book goes over the physical culture of Capoeira. It also goes over the philosophy of it, the tradition and the invention of tradition. This book has many stories of Mestre of Capoeira. It has stories of their accounts and their lives. For example, it has a story of Mestre Pastinha who taught Capoeira until 1992. Over all this book has information that can be useful for our presentation. 
Essien, Aniefre. Capoeira beyond Brazil: from a slave tradition to an international way of life.
	Blue Snake Books, 2008.
	This book goes in deep on the history of Capoeira. It begins with explaining the origins of Capoeira. It goes on the introduce the “Roda”. The roda is a circle where the game happens. The circle is made up of people who stand in a circle and clap their hands. From there the book goes on to explain the attitude and etiquette of Capoeira. In this section the book explains the different types of ways to play the game in the roda. The book also talks about the philosophies of Capoeira, the techniques and strategies, and a few other topics. The main reason I chose this article was for the section on Capoeira in Brazil vs in the USA. Overall the book covers a wide range of topics and it also talks about Capoeira in the States. Even though it has good information it could have used more information on Capoeira in the countries between Brazil and The USA.
Goncalves-Borrega, Juan. “How Brazilian Capoeira Evolved From a Martial Art to an International Dance Craze.” Smithsonian.com, Smithsonian Institution, 21 Sept. 2017, www.smithsonianmag.com/smithsonian-institution/Capoeira-occult-martial-art-international-dance-180964924/.
	This article is good on information. It talks about how Portuguese Crown brought huge numbers of enslaved Africans to Brazil. Once in Brazil they were sold off and made to work in the harsh and humid condition of plantations. The article also tells how their enslavement led to forms of rebellion. In the article one can also read how Capoeira has made its way from Brazil to the states. Mestre Jelon was introduced in the article as the one who planted the first seeds of Capoeira in the United States. A quote by Mestre Jelon Vieira that stood out in the article says, “Capoeira was conceived in Africa and born in Brazil.” Over all this article has useful information on how Capoeira came to be. I believe it to be a useful source because it gives a short background on its beginnings and it also introduces Mestre Jelon Vieira. Like stated before Jelon is credited for planting the first seeds of Capoeira. The introduction of Mestre Jelon helped further guide my research. 
“Brazil's Capoeira gains UN cultural heritage status.” BBC News, BBC, 26 Nov. 2014, www.bbc.com/news/world-latin-america-30219941.
	This article that was published by the BBC gives a brief explanation on what Capoeira is. This article talks about who created the dance. It also includes a short explanation on how it is preformed, and it briefly explains how it is a symbol in Brazilian identity. This article does not contain much information that one could use for research but it is somewhere to start. That’s what this article was used for. It was used as a starting point on gathering research.

Links, www.ficaoakland.org/links.htm.
	This source is FICAs web site. From here I obtained information about the organization that helped with explain what FICA is. It also had information on events that they are holding. 

“Loremil Machado, 40, Afro-Brazilian Dancer.” The New York Times, The New York Times, 11 Mar. 1994, www.nytimes.com/1994/03/12/obituaries/loremil-machado-40-afro-brazilian-dancer.html.
	This newspaper article had information on Loremil Machado. The only information pulled from the article was the date that Loremil passed away.	
“National Endowment for the Arts.” NEA, www.arts.gov/honors/heritage/fellows/jelon-vieira.
	This is a short article contains information on Jelon Vieira. This article was used to obtain information on Jelon. Over all this article contained useful information that helped with the research on Jelon. It had information on his background and achievements.
“Jelon Vieira.” Jelon Vieira – Masters of Traditional Arts, www.mastersoftraditionalarts.org/artists/340. 
	This webpage contains information on Jelon Vieira. The information contained was useful in this research. It gave background information on Vieira and his story on how he encountered Capoeira. 

